1248 - Introducing the factory pattern (#1308)
casper-network/docs: source/docs/casper/developers/writing-onchain-code/factory-pattern.md

---
title: Factory Contracts
---

# Writing Contracts using the Factory Pattern

This guide presents the [factory pattern](https://github.com/casper-network/ceps/pull/86/files) for simple counter contracts to showcase the Casper APIs that support this pattern. The example contract in this guide is a modified counter contract found [here](https://github.com/mpapierski/casper-node/blob/gh-2064-factory-pattern/smart_contracts/contracts/test/counter-factory/src/main.rs).
<!-- TODO before publishing the docs: point to the new link once the casper-node repository is updated. Or, move this counter factory example to https://github.com/casper-ecosystem/tutorials-example-wasm.-->

> The factory pattern is a widely recognized software design concept used in various programming contexts. DApp developers often use the factory pattern to create smart contracts from a given factory entry point. The factory pattern ensures that the contracts produced maintain a specified behavior, such as specific entry points and arguments. Thus, factories produce other smart contracts according to a template.

Author: I think we should keep "the factory pattern" in the first sentence, because we refer to a general software design idea (and this is also used in the CEP description). However, the second and third sentences should be modified, because there are indeed many ways to adapt the original pattern. What do you think about saying this:

```suggestion
The factory pattern is a widely recognized software design concept used in various programming contexts. DApp developers may use factory patterns to create smart contracts from a given source (or factory), such as a factory method or entry point. A factory pattern ensures that the contracts produced maintain a specified behavior, such as specific entry points and arguments. In general, factories produce other smart contracts according to a template.
```

> The factory pattern is a widely recognized software design concept used in various programming contexts. DApp developers often use the factory pattern to create smart contracts from a given factory entry point. The factory pattern ensures that the contracts produced maintain a specified behavior, such as specific entry points and arguments. Thus, factories produce other smart contracts according to a template.

Reviewer: Absolutely, that's definitely what I was thinking. Perfect.

Casper factories are created using the entry point type called `EntryPointType::Install`, which marks an entry point as a factory method responsible for creating and installing contracts on the chain. This installer entry point will derive the Wasm installed on the chain and create a new contract with the same Wasm, just different sets of entry points as required. In other words, these installer entry points marked with `EntryPointType::Install` are the contract factories. When referring to the factory contract on this page, we mean the contract containing the factory entry points.

> The `EntryPointAccess::Template` marks an entry point that exists in the bytecode but is not callable. Thus, regular entry points can be referenced from within installer entry points marked with `EntryPointType::Install`. In object-oriented terms, entry points marked with `EntryPointAccess::Template` act as virtual abstract methods and cannot be called from session code. The Wasm for template entry points is declared at the factory level in the installer logic.

Reviewer 2: > The Wasm for template entry points is declared at the factory level in the installer logic.

May be worth clarifying that _technically_ Wasm is not explicitly declared anywhere (as in: you can't declare wasm bytes inside your session wasm; there's no support for dynamic code as I see it's explained in a note below) but simply taken from the session Wasm. Then, the installer entrypoint derives new Wasm based on the original session Wasm and it is used when a stored contract is executed.

Author: Thanks, @mpapierski. I've removed the incorrect statement about "declared Wasm" and clarified the explanation we already had regarding "derived Wasm":

>  An installer entry point will derive new Wasm based on the original session Wasm and create a new contract with different sets of entry points as required.

See commits 72f78661fbc757b1fe5f35abfe459881aea01dd7 and 955098e272757d6af5f66542ecdffafede7c7d98.
